nina de jesus | digital project librarian | York University

Locating the Library in Institutional Oppression
================================================

1. Introduction^[[a]](#cmnt1)^^[[b]](#cmnt2)^
---------------------------------------------

Attempting to understand where the library is located within
institutional oppression is a difficult proposition. First, because
institutional oppression actively works to disguise, erase, and
obfuscate its mechanisms and their consequences; it is very much the
proverbial devil -- whose greatest trick is to convince the world that
it does not exist. Second, because people sincerely and truly love
libraries. They love libraries for a variety of reasons but many tend to
associate libraries with a cluster of values that is difficult to
gainsay without appearing to side with some fairly unsavoury and
undesirable values.

Neil Gaiman recently wrote this about libraries:

Libraries are about freedom. Freedom to read, freedom of ideas, freedom
of communication. They are about education (which is not a process that
finishes the day we leave school or university), about entertainment,
about making safe spaces, and about access to
information.^[[1]](#ftnt1)^

How do you begin an excursion to locate the library within
institutionalized oppression when this represents the popular, common
conception of libraries? Even if we understand this as idealistic and
unrealistic, a less idealised understanding of libraries still frames
them as fundamentally good institutions that occasionally fail to live
up to their values or ideals.

How do we reconcile this understanding of libraries with the very real
fact that we continue to live in a deeply inequitable society? A society
where oppression fundamentally structures all of our political, social,
and economic institutions? Exploring the topology and geography of
institutional oppression is a perilous activity and fraught with many
dangers.

This excursion shall begin setting out the domain of discourse --
essentially getting the lay of the land by setting out how key terms
like 'institutional oppression' or 'enlightenment' will be used within
the confines of this article. Next, I will delve into the history of
libraries to hopefully uncover what libraries were intended to be. This
will involve understanding and engaging the notion that libraries are
institutions that have been shaped and created as a means to embody and
enforce a particular ideology. Last, I will follow one line of inquiry
about how libraries embody and articulate one specific kind of
institutional oppression, white supremacy, as a way to demonstrate that
libraries cannot be distinguished either from their historical roots nor
from their contemporary context within a white supremacist settler
state.^[[c]](#cmnt3)^^[[d]](#cmnt4)^

2. The Domain of Discourse
--------------------------

### 2.1 Institutional oppression

Perhaps one of the more critical elements of this discussion which
requires absolute clarity is the boundaries of what is meant by
'institutional oppression'. The notion of institutional or systemic
oppression speaks to the ways that certain behaviours, attitudes, and
ideologies become formalized in various social, political, and economic
organizations, groups, structures, etc. It is about how abstract ideas
become reified and concrete through a long, but constantly shifting
process of human social organization.

Institutional oppression isn't about how behaviours, attitudes, and
philosophies are embodied in individuals, but individuals most certainly
do come to embody these things and act as agents of their institutions
while, at the same time, other individuals are oppressed. Nonetheless,
this isn't an examination of the moral and ethical implications of being
oppressive as an individual or of being oppressed as an individual. The
focus will remain on all the ways that institutions are structured,
created, and maintained, thereby reducing the ability of individuals to
make decisions to resist these values.

The clearest ^[[e]](#cmnt5)^^[[f]](#cmnt6)^^[[g]](#cmnt7)^example within
libraries of institutional oppression is controlled vocabularies like
the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) or the Dewey Decimal
Classifications (DDC). There are several well known examples of bias
within these classifications, like the fact that non-Christian religions
within the DDC are forced to share a narrow number range because the
classification system wasn't created with the notion of including them.
This means that catalogers, whatever their individual beliefs and
values, must continue to enforce this ideological (and white-centric)
belief that non-Christian religions are not important (or as important
as the Christian ones).

The way the DDC is set up, a single cataloger ethically opposed to the
exclusion and marginalization of non-Christian religions within the DDC
can do very little to change the overall system. They cannot assign some
other number within the DDC and have it be valid or coherent. If they
were to use some other system of classification, the resulting records
wouldn't work with current technologies, rendering the items
inaccessible. Within such a system, making an ethical choice is very
difficult on an individual basis. However, focusing on the system or
institution allows us to explore solutions that would allow individuals
to make better decisions.

Institutional oppression is about the system and processes that we use
in our daily lives that, by the very nature of how they've been
constructed and devised, exclude, marginalize, and oppress some people
to the benefit of others. As such, attempting to locate the library in
institutionalized oppression is about identifying the processes and
systems within libraries that instantiate oppressive values and beliefs.
These beliefs are not necessarily restricted to the library and, as a
consequence, libraries must also be analyzed in relation to other
social, political, historical, and economic institutions that act upon
the library and that the library, in turn, impacts.

### 2.2 The Enlightenment

Perhaps the current, definitive work on the relationship between
libraries and the enlightenment is,
^[[h]](#cmnt8)^^[[i]](#cmnt9)^^[[j]](#cmnt10)^^[[k]](#cmnt11)^well, ^[[l]](#cmnt12)^^[[m]](#cmnt13)^Libraries
and the Enlightenment by Wayne Bivens-Tatum. ^[[n]](#cmnt14)^Chapter 1
of the book is dedicated to discussing what the enlightenment actually
is and lays out the parameters for Bivens-Tatum's discussion. His
discussion largely rests on a distinction drawn between enlightenment as
historical period and enlightenment as a "set of philosophical and
political principles that emerged from this period in
history"^[[2]](#ftnt2)^.

Bivens-Tatum is also careful to note his bias towards the enlightenment
when he writes:

I will be discussing the principles of the Enlightenment in a positive
way -- in line with numerous historians and philosophers over the last
300 years -- the past few decades have also seen a negative reaction to
certain aspects of Enlightenment, or sometimes...to distortions of
Enlightenment thought taken for the real thing.^[[3]](#ftnt3)^

In the same spirit, I'll state outright that I think the enlightenment
is and was evil. I don't use the word 'evil' lightly, but I'm hard
pressed to think of any other word to describe a set of philosophical
and political ideas that directly led to the deaths of millions of
people and the subjugation of pretty much the entire world under white
colonial powers^[[4]](#ftnt4)^.

My general perspective is to understand the enlightenment as an
ideology. We cannot separate the philosophical and political ideas of
the enlightenment from its historical context. Moreover, we cannot
separate how these ideas formed the conceptual basis for many of our
current political, economic, and social systems.

This also puts one of Bivens-Tatum's comments into an interesting light
"Attitudes have now changed for many in the West -- in those countries
most touched and transformed by Enlightenment"^[[5]](#ftnt5)^. This
statement is almost comically ridiculous and so entirely
Eurocentric that it is breathtaking. The first thing we can understand
from this statement is that Bivens-Tatum mostly certainly understands
the 'West' as being the most civilized place in the world as
enlightenment thought is understood by many people to have a
'civilizing' influence. The fact that he non-critically uses the 'West'
to demarcate white people from the rest of the world betrays how little
he knows (or cares)
^[[o]](#cmnt15)^^[[p]](#cmnt16)^^[[q]](#cmnt17)^about the historical
context of the enlightenment and of racial politics today. This fairly
common usage entirely depends on erasing the inherent violence of the
term 'Western' when one really means 'white'.^[[6]](#ftnt6)^ That he is
most certainly using 'enlightenment' as a stand in for 'civilized' is
fairly clear when he talks about being 'touched and transformed.' We
exist in a contemporary reality where entire continents have been laid
waste by enlightenment values being forced onto them. Entire cultures
and peoples have been so thoroughly transformed after being 'touched' by
the enlightenment that they no longer even have a history, religion, or
culture that would be recognized by their ancestors.

In any case, my hope in this discussion of the enlightenment and its
thought and values is to make it clear that the relative worth of the
enlightenment and its historical impact is heavily influenced by an
individual's own context. Regardless of what Bivens-Tatum asserts, there
is no coherent way to separate out the historical/material realities of
the enlightenment from its thought and values.

To further clarify, since Bivens-Tatum engages in an interesting,
rhetorical sleight of hand: "If anything, it is the immanent critique
within Enlightenment political thought that allows us to view the
contrast between the the rhetoric and practice of, say, Thomas
Jefferson, as a contradiction"^[[7]](#ftnt7)^. This appears tantamount
to Bivens-Tatum asserting that it is because of the enlightenment that
we are able to criticize the enlightenment. Essentially, that it is an
enlightened value of 'freedom' that allows us to perceive the
contradiction of a slave-owner writing about freedom.

Strangely, this insistence on the complete hegemony of enlightenment
values and thought in society today essentially proves the point I've
been trying to make about the enlightenment as being one of many tools
developed during the height of colonialism as a means for ensuring and
maintaining white dominance over the world. That Bivens-Tatum fails to
make room or space for criticisms of the enlightenment that occur
from outside of the tradition represents his commitment to the
myth-making hegemony of the enlightenment itself^[[8]](#ftnt8)^. This is
evident in his statement that "Their historical blindness to their own
contradictions hardly negates the universal appeal of enlightened
political thought"^[[9]](#ftnt9)^.

Part of the point I'm making is that enlightenment values and political
ideas do not have universal appeal. And framing it this way is, itself,
a colonial act meant to enforce the current hegemony of the ideology.
The reality is, colonialism has been resisted from the beginning and it
continues to be resisted. Bivens-Tatum's responses to critics of the
enlightenment has no space for anti-colonial/decolonization critiques of
enlightenment thought and values.^[[r]](#cmnt18)^

This is, above all, where my current criticism of libraries is coming
from: understanding them as an institution within a white supremacist
settler state and, to the extent to which libraries embody enlightenment
values, this is also a criticism of those values themselves. The ongoing
existence of the settler state (especially if we are talking about
Canada and/or the US) and all of its institutions necessitates continued
resistance and working towards decolonization. A small part of which is
deconstructing how even cherished and seemingly unassailable
institutions like libraries continue the colonial project and, thus, are
sites of violence and
oppression.^[[s]](#cmnt19)^^[[t]](#cmnt20)^^[[u]](#cmnt21)^

### 2.3 'Libraries'

To a large extent, this paper will be focusing on public libraries, or,
at least, the idea of public libraries. Libraries obviously existed
before the enlightenment and pre-enlightenment it is pretty easy to see
how libraries functioned as a way to entrench social disparities in
power: few people were literate, few people had access to libraries, and
education was definitely not something that your average person had
access to.

The idea of libraries was created during this period. They are one of
the (many) institutions created by the ideology of enlightenment, as
Bivens-Tatum notes in the opening paragraph of his conclusion:'

The scientific and political principles of the Enlightenment provide the
philosophical foundation for American academic and public libraries, and
the ultimate goal to which these libraries as a system approach -- a
universal library available to all -- would be the culmination of the
Enlightenment project in the domain of information.^[[10]](#ftnt10)^

At this moment in time, it is harder for me to see academic libraries as
fitting within this universal model, mainly because academic libraries
aren't (often) understood as 'public' or as being accessible to
individuals outside of the academic community^[[11]](#ftnt11)^. More
importantly, it is public libraries that exist within the minds and
imaginations of the 'public' as embodying this romanticized ideal.

3. Whence libraries?
--------------------

### 3.1 The historical genesis of libraries

The answer to the questions in the previous section partially rely on
the history of libraries. Getting into the history of libraries can take
many different paths, but for this paper we are going to follow along
with the historical and intellectual context described by Bivens-Tatum
in chapter three of Libraries and the Enlightenment. The chapter is
rather delightfully titled "Public Libraries and the Political
Enlightenment", something that rather supports my ideological approach
for understanding the enlightenment.

In discussing the purpose of public libraries, he notes that:

Public libraries began as instruments of enlightenment, hoping to spread
knowledge and culture broadly to the people, who as free citizens of a
democratic republic required access to that knowledge and culture to
live fuller lives and to become better citizens.^[[12]](#ftnt12)^

He also notes that public libraries pretty have much failed miserably on
this account by not being widely used -- and that those who did use it
were largely interested in entertainment^[[13]](#ftnt13)^.

The first (and most obvious) conclusion we can draw from this is that
public libraries in America were and always have been political. They
have been, since their inception, creations of a specific and particular
ideology. I'm also perfectly willing to follow Bivens-Tatum in saying
that this ideology is that of the political enlightenment.

As such, it is pretty clear that Bivens-Tatum's idea that historical
details and context have little bearing on the ideas can't hold much
weight when we are, at least, speaking of public libraries. The fact
that, for this discussion, we are talking about a specific country (the
US), at a specific point in time are non-trivial details when attempting
to understand the political impact of libraries and the impact politics
had in shaping libraries as we know them. Indeed, this shaping by
political forces is exactly what Bivens-Tatum discusses in the last
section of the chapter^[[14]](#ftnt14)^.

And, in anticipation of his arguments against 'revisionist histories'
about the founding of public libraries^[[15]](#ftnt15)^, I note that I
am, in fact, following his account of the historical motivations and
ideology surrounding the formation of libraries. I do honestly think
that they were motivated by enlightenment ideals. Where we significantly
depart is in statements like this, "we can have a reasonable pluralism
in society, but only if everyone acknowledges the authority of the
public democratic institutions'^[[16]](#ftnt16)^.

So that my position is very clear: I don't acknowledge the authority of
public democratic institutions. This is exactly why I'm writing a paper
locating the library in institutional oppression. I'm not attempting to
quibble about what is or isn't the enlightenment or what did or did not
motivate the creation of public libraries. Part of my argument rests on
the understanding that libraries, as an institution, are
oppressive because of their relationship to a white supremacist,
hetero-patriarchal settler state. And because of the exact reasons he
describes: libraries are necessary for creating better citizens of a
democratic state. ^[[v]](#cmnt22)^This is one of the major reasons why,
as they currently exist in Canada and the US, libraries are a tool of
oppression, rather than of liberation.

### 3.2 Libraries are (and always have been) political institutions

When
Bivens-Tatum^[[w]](#cmnt23)^^[[x]](#cmnt24)^^[[y]](#cmnt25)^ writes:

Public libraries began as instruments of enlightenment, hoping to spread
knowledge and culture broadly to the people, who as free citizens of a
democratic republic required access to that knowledge and culture to
live fuller lives and to become better citizens.^[[17]](#ftnt17)^

It becomes impossible not to understand that the primary purpose of
libraries wasn't education (as he erroneously concludes from a claim
like this^[[18]](#ftnt18)^) bu^[[z]](#cmnt26)^t political. Education
within this ideological statement is only a means to an end: creating
better citizens. In this instance 'better' equals 'better educated.'

Almost nothing in that statement about the purpose of libraries is
value-neutral and ^[[aa]](#cmnt27)^apolitical. And it would be difficult
to unpack everything that is oppressive about this motivation to create
libraries.

One of the clear points of contention is 'citizen.' At the time that the
first public library was founded in the US, only white people were
citizens (and able to become citizens). Of course, citizenship in the US
has been extended to many kinds of people today. However, the point I'm
making about this relationship between libraries and citizenship is
exactly that: 'citizen' is a flexible political category and who is or
isn't a citizen depends entirely on the American settler state. As a
consequence, we can see that libraries were never intended to be for
'everyone.'

Of course, not being for everyone isn't necessarily oppressive. We
generally understand the purpose and value of some kinds of exclusionary
spaces (like women's only shelters or cultural community centres). Even
accepting that it is okay for libraries to be exclusionary spaces (which
Bivens-Tatum wouldn't find acceptable^[[19]](#ftnt19)^), the fact that
libraries are structurally inclined to benefit only those people who
happened to be citizens when public libraries first became a reality
should make us pause. Especially when we see someone like Bivens-Tatum
ar^[[ab]](#cmnt28)^guing that "this is in fact the ultimate goal of both
academic and public libraries, to make all knowledge accessible to every
citizen, a universal library accessible to all"^[[20]](#ftnt20)^.

It is interesting to note this strange conflation in Bivens-Tatum's
claim, since he clearly thinks that 'everyone' is a citizen, which is
demonstrably false. You only need to look at the rhetoric surrounding
undocumented immigrants in the US to understand how much this isn't true
and how much 'citizens' absolutely do not want it to be true. More
importantly, we must also see a tension here with his earlier claims
that "we can have a reasonable pluralism in ^[[ac]](#cmnt29)^society,
but only if everyone acknowledges the authority of the public democratic
institutions"^[[21]](#ftnt21)^. The reality is this: so long as the
purpose of libraries are this closely tied to supporting a settler
state, they will never be able to "make all knowledge
accessible"^[[22]](#ftnt22)^, not when some knowledge has the ability to
destabilize the settler state. Libraries are one means by which the
settler state ensures its continued power.

In a context like this, many of the current real-world examples about
how libraries are 'failing' marginalized people become clearly not a
'failure' but intentional. Public libraries in America and Canada were
not designed for everyone; they are, as Bivens-Tatum says, intended for
citizens. And their purpose is to create better citizens. This is not a
politically neutral purpose.

If we view libraries as embodying a particular political ideology (that
of enlightenment and its support for democracy) and if we understand
that libraries were created to make citizens better, then libraries are
sites of indoctrination^[[ad]](#cmnt30)^. From this angle, public
libraries were never intended to be universal, rather they were always
going to include some information and exclude others. More importantly,
so long as libraries are informed and constrained by the enlightenment
ideology, they will never be universal or live up to the dream of
containing all knowledge and making it accessible to all peoples.

### 3.3 Libraries and Liberalism

That liberalism is the main (or perhaps most successful) political
ideology to come out of the enlightenment apparently goes without
saying: "Liberalism is perhaps the most characteristic political
philosophy of the Enlightenment"^[[23]](#ftnt23)^. In my search for
reference and resources for this paper, the connection between liberal
philosophy and the enlightenment was simply taken as fact rather than
something that needed to be established. And Bivens-Tatum definitely
connects liberalism with the enlightenment in his book with no
explanation or attempt at explaining the relationship. As such, I'm
going to take this as a given: liberalism is the modern day embodiment
of enlightenment values.

It does need to be noted, though, that liberalism as political
philosophy/ideology is not really at all connected to political parties
as they currently exist in Canada or the US. The type of liberal
political ideology that was born out of the enlightenment fundamentally
structures most contemporary political parties and organizations. This
ideology broadly encapsulates the values of having a democratic state,
freedom and inherent rights, etc. While current political parties debate
about what counts as 'freedom' and how, exactly, the democratic state
should be run, most of the larger, influential ones agree on these basic
tenets^[[24]](#ftnt24)^.

In the ALA's Code of Ethics, they write:

We significantly influence or control the selection, organization,
preservation, and dissemination of information. In a political system
grounded in an informed citizenry, we are members of a profession
explicitly committed to intellectual freedom and the freedom of access
to information. We have a special obligation to ensure the free flow of
information and ideas to present and future
generations.^[[25]](#ftnt25)^

It should be fairly easy to see the parallels of this statement to what
Bivens-Tatum notes was the original motivation for the creation of
public libraries, at least as far as the 'political system grounded in
an informed citizenry' is concerned.

As the Annoyed Librarian also notes:

Outside of a commitment to liberal democracy in general -- which, by the
way, is the only regime that supports the intellectual freedom of
writers, artists, historians, philosophers, etc. -- liberal institutions
should take no substantive political position. A liberal library
association would support intellectual freedom, access to information,
and liberal democratic political institutions, but wouldn't go on to
make political statements irrelevant to libraries.^[[26]](#ftnt26)^

While the Annoyed Librarian does think that the ALA (or at least parts
of it) are failing this liberal standard, it doesn't make a difference
to the reality that, failing or not, liberalism (and thus enlightenment)
is the fundamental political philosophy informing how (at the very
least) libraries and librarians think of themselves.

Last, as I began exploring in the previous section, we can see that,
yes, libraries are political institutions and, from this section, they
are politically liberal institutions (in the classical understanding of
liberalism). This also means that regardless of what the Annoyed
Librarian and ALA wish, the proposition that libraries (and librarians)
be politically neutral is a self-defeating one. Claiming that libraries
ought to be liberal institutions that take 'no substantive political
position' is a political position in and of itself. And it is not a
neutral one (if such a thing is even possible).

4 Libraries, democracy, and the logics of white supremacy
---------------------------------------------------------

This part of the paper takes a substantive left turn from the outline,
mainly because of issues with articles residing behind paywalls that
would help me develop concrete lines of criticisms about the
contemporary organization and structure of public libraries.
^[[ae]](#cmnt31)^^[[af]](#cmnt32)^^[[ag]](#cmnt33)^I'm also focusing on
only one line of criticism, white supremacy and decolonization, because
of how focused my earlier sections are on the role that public libraries
play (or ought to play) in maintaining a democratic (settler) state.

I'm also largely depending on Andrea Smith's understanding of how white
supremacy is constituted:

We may wish to rearticulate our understanding of white supremacy by not
assuming that it is enacted in a single fashion; rather, white supremacy
is constituted by separate and distinct, but still interrelated, logics.
I would argue that the three primary logics of white supremacy in the US
context include: (1) slaveability/anti-black racism, which anchors
capitalism; (2) genocide, which anchors colonialism; and (3)
orientalism, which anchors war.^[[27]](#ftnt27)^

Since it provides an easy three lens view through which I can examine
the library as institution within a larger, democratic settler state
like the US or Canada I will demonstrate some of the claims I've made
elsewhere in the paper.

Namely, that libraries, being liberal institutions, are not 'neutral' in
the ways that many of the sources cited in this paper either want them
to be or believe they are. Rather, the explicit and expressed function
of libraries, from their inception in the US and Canadian political
structures to their existence today, is to create an informed citizenry
for the sake of democracy. This allows us to finally locate the library
in institutional oppression.

### 4.1 The Logic of Slavery

Andrea Smith writes:

One pillar of white supremacy is the logic of slavery. This logic
renders black people as inherently enslavable—as nothing more than
property...This logic is the anchor of capitalism. That is, the
capitalist system ultimately commodifies all workers: one’s own person
becomes a commodity that one must sell in the labour market while the
profits of one’s work are taken by somebody else. To keep this
capitalist system in place—which ultimately commodifies most people—the
logic of slavery applies a racial hierarchy to this
system.^[[28]](#ftnt28)^

The way that libraries articulate this logic of white supremacy is
expressed in the fourth statement in the ALA's Code of Ethics, "We
respect intellectual property rights"^[[29]](#ftnt29)^.

As stated in the preprint of "Property Rights and Capitalism in
the Oxford Handbook of Capitalism, "property rights are a necessary but
not sufficient condition for capitalism"^[[30]](#ftnt30)^. When
discussing how private property resolves the tragedy of the commons they
note, "through the right to exclude, private property rights transform
common pool resources into private goods. Excludability, together with
the right to control and claim to value, eliminates both
problems"^[[31]](#ftnt31)^.

This is an important distinction from how many non-Black
conceptualizations focus on Black labour in settler states:

Theories that attempt to triangulate Blackness into the Settler/Native
antagonism in White settler states do so by positing Blackness as the
labor force that helps make the settler landscape possible. It is true
that Black labor literally tills, fences in and cultivates the settler’s
land. However, this singular analysis both obscures the issue of Black
fungibility and reduces Blackness to a mere tool of settlement rather
than a constitutive element of settler colonialism’s conceptual
order.^[[32]](#ftnt32)^

In attempting to understand how the logic of slavery informs and
structures intellectual property, we can see from King that "the
enslaved embody the abstract “interchangeability and replaceability”
that is endemic to the commodity... Beyond, the captive body’s use as
labor, the Black body has a figurative and metaphorical value that
extends into the realm of the discursive and
symbolic"^[[33]](#ftnt33)^ and that "intellectual property is
extremely important for capitalism"^[[34]](#ftnt34)^. Lastly, "the
overall trend in intellectual property protection is broadly correlated
with the rise of capitalism. In fact, some institutional features
associated with capitalism had to exist prior to the full development of
intellectual property rights"^[[35]](#ftnt35)^.

Thus, we can see that capitalism, as whole, rests on the logic of
slavery^[[ah]](#cmnt34)^^[[ai]](#cmnt35)^^[[aj]](#cmnt36)^ and that
intellectual property, as we know it today, is somewhat dependent on the
existence of 'institutional features' of capitalism. As such, the ALA's
avowed support for intellectual property entails support for capitalism
and white supremacy, as one cannot currently 'respect intellectual
property rights' without supporting the institutions of capitalism that
gave rise to our current system and which, in turn, is fundamentally
structured around the logic of slavery.

Of course, many people would counter this claim by saying that the
manner by which libraries operate fundamentally contradicts this
capitalist impulse by making 'intellectual property' freely accessible
to the public. Except this isn't entirely true or, rather, it doesn't
represent the entire picture.

When we look at the work of libraries, we begin to see that they
actually play a significant role in not just 'respecting intellectual
property' but in ensuring the stability of intellectual property itself.
One mechanism through which libraries do this is through the creation of
'authority records': "An authority record is a tool used by librarians
to establish forms of names (for persons, places, meetings, and
organizations), titles, and subjects used on bibliographic
records"^[[36]](#ftnt36)^.

While the Library of Congress (LOC) makes it clear that authority
records are created with the intent to improve accessibility, the
mechanism they use for this ensures that every creative work necessarily
has an identifiable owner. This is necessary in a system of capital
wherein everything and everyone can (and likely will be) reduced to a
commodity. Having 'orphaned works'
cr^[[ak]](#cmnt37)^^[[al]](#cmnt38)^eates a serious problem within a
system of intellectual property and should be avoided where possible
within capitalism^[[37]](#ftnt37)^.

This is only one way that libraries come to be implicated via active
participation in the logic of slavery, of capitalism, and of white
supremacy. We can also see that libraries, regardless of their making
'knowledge' or 'information' accessible for free, do not actually
challenge or resist this logic. Rather, libraries are another
institution necessary for maintaining a system of intellectual property
within a larger context of white supremacy that depends on the inherent
enslavability of Black people.

### 4.2 The Logic of Genocide

According to Andrea Smith:

This logic holds that indigenous peoples must disappear. In fact, they
must always be disappearing, in order to enable non-indigenous peoples’
rightful claim to land. Through this logic of genocide, non-Native
peoples then become the rightful inheritors of all that was
indigenous—land, resources, indigenous spirituality, and culture.
Genocide serves as the anchor of colonialism: it is what allows
non-Native peoples to feel they can rightfully own indigenous peoples’
land. It is acceptable exclusively to possess land that is the home of
indigenous peoples because indigenous peoples have
disappeared.^[[38]](#ftnt38)^

How libraries enforce this logic of white supremacy should be rather
obvious by this point. It ^[[am]](#cmnt39)^has been noted many times
within this paper that libraries were created and continue to be
conceived as institutions designed for benefit of creating an informed
citizenry for the sake of democracy.

This can only be established as a value in a settler state like the US
or Canada if the Indigenous peoples of this region have already
disappeared. For 'Canada' and the 'United States' to continue to exist
as democratic states (or for them to even be conceived as such) requires
either that we understand that the Indigenous genocide is already
complete or that we ensure that the genocide is ongoing. Since it is a
fact that the Indigenous peoples of North America continue to exist, the
ideal of libraries as liberal institutions existing to make democracy
'better,' thus stronger, is no less than an ideal wherein the genocide
of Indigenous peoples is finally completed (putting democracy in its
strongest possible position).

By and large, this is what is missing from Bivens-Tatum's glowing
account of libraries and the enlightenment. He wants us to distinguish
the historical and material realities of the enlightenment from its
ideas/philosophy. Except his basic error is not realizing that the
historical and material context of the enlightenment is not actually
'historical' at all. As we continue to grapple with the ideas of the
enlightenment today, so do we grapple with the material conditions that
both caused and are caused by the enlightenment (settler colonialism,
white supremacy, etc).

However, we cannot be surprised by this, since the logic of genocide is
"that indigenous peoples must disappear"^[[39]](#ftnt39)^, so the
absence of their struggle against settler colonialism in the US (and all
other settler states) is necessary. This absence, of course, extends not
only to their physical disappearance, but their disappearance from
history and discourse. Thus, the ethical code for librarians is
fundamentally rooted in the ongoing Indigenous genocides.

### 4.3 The Logic of Orientalism

As Andrea Smith states:

The logic of orientalism marks certain peoples or nations as inferior
and deems them to be a constant threat to the wellbeing of empire...
Consequently, orientalism serves as the anchor of war, because it allows
the United States to justify being in a constant state of war to protect
itself from its enemies. Orientalism allows the United States to defend
the logics of slavery and genocide as these practices enable it to stay
“strong enough” to fight these constant wars.^[[40]](#ftnt40)^

Smith doesn't go into the details of Orientalism, as it was developed by
Edward Said^[[41]](#ftnt41)^, but libraries firmly belong to the
discursive space identified by Said as "a structured set of concepts,
assumptions, and discursive practices that were used to produce,
interpret, and evaluate knowledge about non-European
peoples"^[[42]](#ftnt42)^. It is this knowledge that informs the logic
of orientalism described by Smith -- the logic that allows the US to
justify its ongoing wars.

Libraries disguise their Orientalism by invoking the stance of
neutrality: "We distinguish between our personal convictions and
professional duties and do not allow our personal beliefs to interfere
with fair representation of the aims of our institutions or the
provision of access to their information resources"^[[43]](#ftnt43)^.
However, it is pretty easy to see that libraries are far from neutral
spaces. There are many examples in the literature about the ways that
collection development^[[44]](#ftnt44)^, reference^[[45]](#ftnt45)^,
cataloguing^[[46]](#ftnt46)^, and many other library functions reveal
deep biases in how the library as an institution exists. More
importantly, as Bivens-Tatum himself writes, "we can have a reasonable
pluralism in society, but only if everyone acknowledges the authority of
the public democratic institutions"^[[47]](#ftnt47)^. In such as
situation, it is impossible for neutrality to exist.

Thus, if we look past this claim of neutrality and understand that it is
an impossible position, we begin to understand how libraries come to
articulate the logic of orientalism. Part of what made Said's work so
groundbreaking and influential is that he demonstrated the way that
knowledge creation within the empire is not (and never has been) a
neutral activity and so the knowledge itself cannot be neutral. One of
the interesting distinctions often drawn in library literature is
between 'information' and 'knowledge'. Information is understood as
neutral facts and knowledge is created when we understand information
(or something like that). It is a tidy distinction that allows neutral
librarians to feel like we are transmitting neutral facts, all
unmediated by reality.

Most criticisms of library neutrality tend to focus on the librarians
and/or institution, rather than the 'information' or 'knowledge'
preserved, stored, communicated, and legitimized by libraries. This is
something that definitely holds somewhat more true for research
collections, like many academic libraries, over public libraries (but
public libraries are still very much implicated in this). Said's claims
are, in part, explorations about the epistemology of empire, of colonial
expansion, and of war but few criticisms of library neutrality have
examined or focused on the role that libraries have within the empire
and its epistemology.

When we look into the collections, the actual 'information' contained in
libraries and how it is organized, we can see that they (surely by
accident) somehow manage to construct a reality wherein whiteness is
default, normal, civilized and everything else is Other. In so doing,
libraries very much participate in a larger imperial project that
justifies war. We see that libraries very happily fulfill this
expectation of Bivens-Tatum: "we can have a reasonable pluralism in
society, but only if everyone acknowledges the authority of the public
democratic institutions"^[[48]](#ftnt48)^, since these 'public
democratic institutions' he is discussing are constituent parts of the
empire. Seen from this light, is it at all surprising that library
collections play their happy role in the Orientalist project of creating
the Other?

5 Conclusions
-------------

Looking back, now, at this paper and seeing what all I had to say during
this excursion, one of the surprising themes (to me at least) is how
often the concept of 'neutrality' came under fire, even though this was
not intended. But, as I consider it now, it seems obvious to me that
neutrality has been central to locating the library in institutional
oppression. Simply a more complex concept of neutrality than is usually
discussed within the literature, which tends to focus on the coherence
of the neutrality of the individuals operating and working within
libraries or on some of the processes and systems of libraries (like
classification).

The main notion of neutrality that I challenge within this article is
that of institutional neutrality. Regardless of many people's feelings
about the coherence of individual neutrality, many have taken it as
axiomatic that libraries are neutral institutions and that any failure
of libraries to be neutral is largely the fault of individuals failing
to live up to the ideals or ethics of the profession, rather than
understanding the library as institution as fundamentally non-neutral.
An institution that was created not only for a specific ideological
purpose but for an ideology that is fundamentally oppressive in
nature.^[[an]](#cmnt40)^ As such, the failings of libraries can be
re-interpreted not as libraries failing to live up to their ideals and
values, but rather as symptoms and evidence of this foundational and
oppressive ideology.

In tying my line of criticism to that of colonialism, settler
colonialism, and white supremacy (but as a reminder: there are many
other lines of criticism that can and ought to be explored when
situating the library in institutional oppression), I also have the
seeds of solutions, for those who want for such things. The clear
solution is decolonization. Of course, this is a difficult prospect for
many within the field since it precludes any solution that is reformist
in nature; no reform is possible if we understand libraries as
fundamentally white supremacist institutions.

For those who find this unpalatable, there is, perhaps, a worthwhile
solution in decoupling libraries from their avowed goal in propping up
and strengthening settler democracies. This could allow us to preserve
the institution, but would require drastic and daring changes to the
overall structure and organization of libraries. Libraries, unlike other
institutions of settler states (like the judicial system), have at least
some emancipatory potential. Again, though, this would require that
libraries and librarians be willing to enact drastic changes.

Changes like entirely doing away with the LCSH and DDC. With creating
new systems of classification that aren't fundamentally white
supremacist by nature. ^[[ao]](#cmnt41)^It would require breaking and
disrupting the system of intellectual property and other aspects of
capitalism, especially the publishing industry. It would require
disrupting the empire's mechanisms for creating 'knowledge' by not
simply being a repository for imperial knowledge products. It would
require supporting Indigenous resistance to the settler state.

Of course, all of this means breaking pretty much every established
value and ideal of libraries today.

6 Works Cited
-------------

Addams, Suellen S., and Kate Pierce. “Is There a Transgender Canon?:
Information Seeking and Use in the Transgender Community,” 2006.
http://www.cais-acsi.ca/proceedings/2006/adams\_2006.pdf.

Annoyed Librarian. “Libraries as Liberal Institutions.” Accessed August
3, 2014.
http://annoyedlibrarian.blogspot.ca/2006/12/libraries-as-liberal-institutions.html.

Berman, Sanford, 1933-. “‘Inside’ Censorship.” De Facto Censorship
Implicit in Collection Decisions, no. 18 (July 15, 2001): 48–63.

Bivens-Tatum, Wayne. Libraries and the Enlightenment /. Library Juice
Press,, 2012.

Bristow, William. “Enlightenment.” Edited by Edward N. Zalta. The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2011.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/enlightenment/.

“Code of Ethics of the American Library Association.” Accessed August 3,
2014. http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics.

Curry, Ann. “If I Ask, Will They Answer?” Reference & User Services
Quarterly 45, no. 1 (Fall 2005): 65–75.

Downey, Jennifer. “Public Library Collection Development Issues
Regarding the Information Needs of GLBT Patrons.” Progressive Librarian,
no. 25 (Summer 2005): 86–95.

“Frequently Asked Questions (Library of Congress Authorities).” Accessed
August 3, 2014. http://authorities.loc.gov/help/auth-faq.htm\#1.

Gaiman, Neil. “Why Our Future Depends on Libraries, Reading and
Daydreaming.” The Guardian, October 15, 2013, sec. Books.
http://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/15/neil-gaiman-future-libraries-reading-daydreaming.

King, Tiffany. “Labor’s Aphasia: Toward Antiblackness as Constitutive to
Settler Colonialism.” Decolonization. Accessed August 9, 2014.
http://decolonization.wordpress.com/2014/06/10/labors-aphasia-toward-antiblackness-as-constitutive-to-settler-colonialism/.

Klumpp, Tilman, and Paul H. Rubin. “Property Rights and Capitalism.” In
The Oxford Handbook of Capitalism, edited by Dennis C. Mueller. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2012.

Kohn, Margaret. “Colonialism.” Edited by Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2014.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/colonialism/.

“Orphan Works and Mass Digitization | U.S. Copyright Office.” Accessed
August 3, 2014. http://www.copyright.gov/orphan/.

Roberto, K. R., ed. Radical Cataloging: Essays at the Front. Jefferson,
N.C: McFarland & Co, 2008.

Said, Edward W. Orientalism. Penguin Classics. London: Penguin, 2003.

Smith, Andrea.^[[ap]](#cmnt42)^ “Indigeneity, Settler Colonialism, White
Supremacy - Centre for World Dialogue.” Global Dialogue 12, no. 2
(2010). http://www.worlddialogue.org/content.php?id=488.

Wolfson, Matthew. “The Origins of Globalisation.” Prospect Magazine, May
14, 2013.
http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/arts-and-books/david-armitage-foundations-of-modern-international-thought-review.

* * * * *

[[1]](#ftnt_ref1)Gaiman, Neil. “Why Our Future Depends on Libraries,
Reading and Daydreaming.” The Guardian, October 15, 2013, sec. Books.
http://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/15/neil-gaiman-future-libraries-reading-daydreaming.

[[2]](#ftnt_ref2)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 2.

[[3]](#ftnt_ref3)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 2.

[[4]](#ftnt_ref4)And, in those cases where the enlightenment was
responsible for causing it, it was justifying the series of events set
in motion in earlier times.^[[aq]](#cmnt43)^ Moreover, much like the
proverbial devil, the greatest trick that the enlightenment pulled was
convincing the world we are better off for it.

[[5]](#ftnt_ref5)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 5.

[[6]](#ftnt_ref6)While this doesn't really fit into the scope of the
paper, I wanted to point out just how simply the genocide of the
Indigenous peoples of the Americas is erased with this quotation, by
Matthew Wolfson on the enlightenment, "It was also the period in which
North and South America were discovered, depopulated and then
repopulated." 'Depopulated' is such a sanitary term for the genocide
of millions of people. More to the point, this is an ongoing genocide as
settler states like Canada and the US continue the colonial project.
This is why using 'western' for 'white' is violent, as it erases the
ongoing genocide of the Indigenous people of the Americas. It treats the
colonial project of 'depopulating' and 'repopulating' the Americas as
finished, when it is pretty clear that Indigenous peoples in Canada and
the US continue to resist settler colonialism.

[[7]](#ftnt_ref7)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 18.

[[8]](#ftnt_ref8)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 23.

[[9]](#ftnt_ref9)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 133.

[[10]](#ftnt_ref10)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 185.

[[11]](#ftnt_ref11)This is despite the reality that many academic
libraries do, in fact pay additional money for licensing to their
electronic resources so that people outside of the university can access
the collections. Additionally, many do have open stacks (or easily
obtainable guest passes to their physical collections -- and some with
community library cards). However, academic libraries appear to do
little in the way of outreach to the external community and very few
community members actually know that they are able to make use of these
research collections.^[[ar]](#cmnt44)^

[[12]](#ftnt_ref12)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 133.

[[13]](#ftnt_ref13)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 133.

[[14]](#ftnt_ref14)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 133-140.

[[15]](#ftnt_ref15)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 111.

[[16]](#ftnt_ref16)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 112.

[[17]](#ftnt_ref17)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 133.

[[18]](#ftnt_ref18)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 133.

[[19]](#ftnt_ref19)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 140.

[[20]](#ftnt_ref20)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 140.

[[21]](#ftnt_ref21)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 112.

[[22]](#ftnt_ref22)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 140.

[[23]](#ftnt_ref23)Bristow, William. “Enlightenment.” Edited by Edward
N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2011.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/enlightenment/.

[[24]](#ftnt_ref24)In Canada, for example, while the Conservative party
and the Liberal party place a different emphasis on what they consider
'freedom' and have divergent views on economics, neither has any
interest in pushing for a non-democratic Canada.

[[25]](#ftnt_ref25)“Code of Ethics of the American Library Association.”
Accessed August 3, 2014.
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics.

[[26]](#ftnt_ref26)Annoyed Librarian. “Annoyed Librarian: Libraries as
Liberal Institutions.” Accessed August 3, 2014.
http://annoyedlibrarian.blogspot.ca/2006/12/libraries-as-liberal-institutions.html.

[[27]](#ftnt_ref27)Smith, Andrea. “Indigeneity, Settler Colonialism,
White Supremacy - Centre for World Dialogue.” Global Dialogue 12, no. 2
(2010). http://www.worlddialogue.org/content.php?id=488.

[[28]](#ftnt_ref28)Smith, Andrea. “Indigeneity, Settler Colonialism,
White Supremacy - Centre for World Dialogue.” Global Dialogue 12, no. 2
(2010). http://www.worlddialogue.org/content.php?id=488.

[[29]](#ftnt_ref29)“Code of Ethics of the American Library Association.”
Accessed August 3, 2014.
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics.

[[30]](#ftnt_ref30)Klumpp, Tilman, and Paul H. Rubin. “Property Rights
and Capitalism.” In The Oxford Handbook of Capitalism, edited by Dennis
C. Mueller. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012, 1. Preprint here:
http://www.ualberta.ca/\~klumpp/docs/PropertyRightsFinal.pdf

[[31]](#ftnt_ref31)Klumpp, Tilman, and Paul H. Rubin. “Property Rights
and Capitalism.” In The Oxford Handbook of Capitalism, edited by Dennis
C. Mueller. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012, 6. Preprint here:
http://www.ualberta.ca/\~klumpp/docs/PropertyRightsFinal.pdf

[[32]](#ftnt_ref32)King, Tiffany. “Labor’s Aphasia: Toward Antiblackness
as Constitutive to Settler Colonialism.” Decolonization. Accessed August
9, 2014.
http://decolonization.wordpress.com/2014/06/10/labors-aphasia-toward-antiblackness-as-constitutive-to-settler-colonialism/.

[[33]](#ftnt_ref33)King, Tiffany. “Labor’s Aphasia: Toward Antiblackness
as Constitutive to Settler Colonialism.” Decolonization. Accessed August
9, 2014.
http://decolonization.wordpress.com/2014/06/10/labors-aphasia-toward-antiblackness-as-constitutive-to-settler-colonialism/.

[[34]](#ftnt_ref34)Klumpp, Tilman, and Paul H. Rubin. “Property Rights
and Capitalism.” In The Oxford Handbook of Capitalism, edited by Dennis
C. Mueller. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012, 10. Preprint here:
http://www.ualberta.ca/\~klumpp/docs/PropertyRightsFinal.pdf

[[35]](#ftnt_ref35)Klumpp, Tilman, and Paul H. Rubin. “Property Rights
and Capitalism.” In The Oxford Handbook of Capitalism, edited by Dennis
C. Mueller. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012, 11. Preprint here:
http://www.ualberta.ca/\~klumpp/docs/PropertyRightsFinal.pdf

[[36]](#ftnt_ref36)“Frequently Asked Questions (Library of Congress
Authorities).” Accessed August 3, 2014.
http://authorities.loc.gov/help/auth-faq.htm\#1.

[[37]](#ftnt_ref37)Just read the US Copyright's office's statement on
orphaned works: “Orphan Works and Mass Digitization | U.S. Copyright
Office.” Accessed August 3, 2014. http://www.copyright.gov/orphan/.

[[38]](#ftnt_ref38)Smith, Andrea. “Indigeneity, Settler Colonialism,
White Supremacy - Centre for World Dialogue.” Global Dialogue 12, no. 2
(2010). http://www.worlddialogue.org/content.php?id=488.

[[39]](#ftnt_ref39)Smith, Andrea. “Indigeneity, Settler Colonialism,
White Supremacy - Centre for World Dialogue.” Global Dialogue 12, no. 2
(2010). http://www.worlddialogue.org/content.php?id=488.

[[40]](#ftnt_ref40)Smith, Andrea. “Indigeneity, Settler Colonialism,
White Supremacy - Centre for World Dialogue.” Global Dialogue 12, no. 2
(2010). http://www.worlddialogue.org/content.php?id=488.

[[41]](#ftnt_ref41)Said, Edward W. Orientalism. Penguin Classics.
London: Penguin, 2003.

[[42]](#ftnt_ref42)Kohn, Margaret. “Colonialism.” Edited by Edward N.
Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2014.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/colonialism/.

[[43]](#ftnt_ref43)“Code of Ethics of the American Library Association.”
Accessed August 3, 2014.
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics.

[[44]](#ftnt_ref44)See Downey, Jennifer. “Public Library Collection
Development Issues Regarding the Information Needs of GLBT Patrons.”
Progressive Librarian, no. 25 (Summer 2005): 86–95.

[[45]](#ftnt_ref45)See Curry, Ann. “If I Ask, Will They Answer?”
Reference & User Services Quarterly 45, no. 1 (Fall 2005): 65–75.
http://pacificreference.pbworks.com/f/If+I+Ask,+Will+They+Answer.pdf

[[46]](#ftnt_ref46)See “Teaching the Radical Catalog.” in Radical
Cataloging: Essays at the Front, ed. K.R. Roberto. Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland, April 2008.
http://www.emilydrabinski.com/teaching-the-radical-catalog/

[[47]](#ftnt_ref47)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 112.

[[48]](#ftnt_ref48)Bivens-Tatum, Wayne, Libraries and the
Enlightenment (Library Juice Press, 2012), 112.

[[a]](#cmnt_ref1)I think this whole section could be tightened up, and
that doing so would get the reader hooked more quickly. I'm also a fan
of BLUF - Bottom Line Up Front. Could you begin the piece with your
basic claim: "Despite being a much-loved institution, "the library"
 continues to reflect and perpetuate the oppressive values inherent in
the Enlightenment fueled genesis of the institution."

[[b]](#cmnt_ref2)That reminds me to remind you that you'll need an "In
Brief". See the site for examples, but it's basically a mini abstract.

[[c]](#cmnt_ref3)I am so excited to keep reading.

[[d]](#cmnt_ref4)whoa yeah

[[e]](#cmnt_ref5)Instead of easiest; how about "clearest" or "most well
documented". I also wonder if there are any OA sources you could cite
here -- certainly Sandy Berman and Hope Olsen have done lots of work on
this, but don't know if any of it is OA.

[[f]](#cmnt_ref6)\_Marked as resolved\_

[[g]](#cmnt_ref7)\_Re-opened\_

[[h]](#cmnt_ref8)I could use a bit of a transition here to set up why
the relationship between libraries & enlightenment matters; and (for
this non-historian), a very brief definition of the enlightenment.

[[i]](#cmnt_ref9)A suggested lead in -- "The library's location in
institutional oppression stems from its historical and political roots
in enlightenment ideologies. Although WBT's work on libraries and the
enlightenment highlights the positive side of the enlightenment, my
analysis focuses a much more critical lens on both the historical period
of the enlightenment and on enlightenment as a set of values and
principles."

[[j]](#cmnt_ref10)+1

[[k]](#cmnt_ref11)+1

[[l]](#cmnt_ref12)this feels out of place with the tone of the rest of
the article

[[m]](#cmnt_ref13)Agree w/ ellie here. I think you need something to
introduce why the Enlightenment matters. (minor point, WBT capitalizes
Enlightenment, and you do not. I assume that is purposeful on your part,
but perhaps a footnote explaining why?)

[[n]](#cmnt_ref14)oops ... should I have read WBT's book before
reviewing? ;-)

[[o]](#cmnt_ref15)bold claims that are likely to meet with strong
pushback when published. How important is this paragraph to your
argument? I'm not saying it isn't compelling in its own right, but I
worry that the defensiveness it is likely to engender might detract from
the impact of your bigger points.

[[p]](#cmnt_ref16)+1

[[q]](#cmnt_ref17)I would also caution against a defensive posture that
- IMO - veers a little too close to an ad hominem.

[[r]](#cmnt_ref18)I like this, it's clear. I don't know that you need to
take so long to get to this point, though.

[[s]](#cmnt_ref19)THIS -- this is the key point so far, and I'd like to
see it made this clearly somewhere earlier in the paper.

[[t]](#cmnt_ref20)+1

[[u]](#cmnt_ref21)yes

[[v]](#cmnt_ref22)you might get into this further on, or it might not
have a place here, or you might already be saying it with different
words, but certainly what was taught in my library history classes is
that the purpose of public libraries at the beginning of the united
states history as a nation was that of assimilation and 'washing the
unwashed masses'. one could tilt their head just right to try look at
this as purely "good" but it was definitely presented in a critical
light in my classes.

[[w]](#cmnt_ref23)A general comment that I want to put down and come
back to - I feel like broadly speaking you're using Bivens-Tatum as a
stand in for "history as taught by the conquerors"/common view, but a
lot of the phrasing strikes me as a more specific attack on Bivens-Tatum
as a stand alone. When I'm finished the article I want to come back and
see if I feel the same way, as well as see if I think this needs to be
addressed.

[[x]](#cmnt_ref24)Agree - up to this point the paper does feel a little
too much like a response to WBT.

[[y]](#cmnt_ref25)Agreed. I followed along on github and came away with
much the same impression.

[[z]](#cmnt_ref26)too many negatives in this sentence -- i had to read
it several times to understand. I think you can simply say "it is clear
that libraries were not only (or even mainly) about education; but that
the purpose of libraries was primarily political."

[[aa]](#cmnt_ref27)or?

[[ab]](#cmnt_ref28)I think it would be a stronger argument if you could
find others who espouse this ideology abt libraries. Surely there are
library bloggers who have talked this way? (have I??? Yikes!)

[[ac]](#cmnt_ref29)this is a comment more for WBT than for Nina -- but
what exactly is a "reasonable pluralism"?  Guess I will have to read the
book.

[[ad]](#cmnt_ref30)Public libraries in the US are also often tied to the
government as a way citizens (and people attempting to become citizens)
without other means interact with government forms and procedures - I'm
thinking of libraries providing citizenship training materials and
classes, access to tax forms, etc.

[[ae]](#cmnt_ref31)I don't remember that the paper has established that
no paywalled articles will be used. We should make that clear either in
the introduction or in an editor or authors note in front of the
article.

[[af]](#cmnt_ref32)I think the commitment to using only OA sources
should be in the intro. And I think you should be explicit that the fact
that libraries are complicit in locking up knowledge behind paywalls is
part of what you mean when you say they are part of institutional
oppression -- and that as such you are not using paywalled resources to
write this article.

[[ag]](#cmnt_ref33)+1

[[ah]](#cmnt_ref34)I'm personally open to this statement, but I don't
find it proven by the preceding paragraph. Possibly because it is
somewhat hard to follow the string of quotes. Can you try laying it out
for me in your own words?

[[ai]](#cmnt_ref35)agreed. I'm not following the logic here.

[[aj]](#cmnt_ref36)+1

[[ak]](#cmnt_ref37)"orphaned works" generally has a different meaning
than what you imply. You seem to imply that a work is orphaned if it is
not assigned an authoritative owner; but the general meaning of the term
is a work where the copyright holder cannot be found - not necessarily
because they have not been authoritatively assigned.

[[al]](#cmnt_ref38)I agree. Maybe anonymous works?

[[am]](#cmnt_ref39)not obvious to me at this point.

[[an]](#cmnt_ref40)fragment

[[ao]](#cmnt_ref41)fragment

[[ap]](#cmnt_ref42)Since Smith's piece forms part of the framework for
your argument; I suggest mentioning it earlier and acknowledging that
you are using her work to frame your criticism of libraries.

[[aq]](#cmnt_ref43)I'm not following this.

[[ar]](#cmnt_ref44)true! also fwiw - any state funded academic
institution in the US is required to provide access to the community.
